src/posts/deciding-what-to-do-next.md, before:

---
path: "/deciding-what-to-do-next"
date: "2018-05-15"
title: "Deciding what to do next"
description: "With the limited amount of time we have, it’s extremely important that we spend as much of it as possible doing things that matter most to us. When deciding what to do next, for me, it’s about finding the intersection of three things."
---

With the limited amount of time we have, it’s extremely important that we spend as much of it as possible doing things that matter most to us. Call it your purpose, your why, your reason for being, call it what you want. When deciding what to do next, for me, it’s about finding the intersection of three things: What can I be the best at? What can I make money doing? What am I deeply passionate about?

Time spent not chasing that intersection is time wasted.

I’m looking for things that fall into the category of “I absolutely must do this.” There is a chasm between what we **can do** and what we **absolutely must do**.

I could get a job working at a local company. I could write a book. I could do freelance work. There’s nothing wrong with doing any of these things. The point is, I want to do the things that make me say, “I can’t imagine doing anything else.”

To provide some context, I recently came to a crossroads. For the last year and a half, I’ve been working on [Pluto](https://talkpluto.com/). I’ve been lucky to be chasing that intersection and doing what I absolutely had to do, but, some things change. I learned a ton but ultimately, I decided to change course. This post details my thought process for deciding what to do next with my life after starting a startup. It can be applied to any big decision about what to pursue.

## List #1: Brain dumping everything I want to accomplish

When I created my first list, I wrote down everything I wanted to do. I did this with little forethought, dumping whatever thoughts I had on to the page. I decided to do this same exercise a few different times, in a few different ways. Decisions with long-term effects require long-term thinking. I wasn’t going to be happy if I settled on something I wasn’t excited about.

```
As a side note, I realized that before deciding what to do next, it was perfectly fine to continue doing what I was doing. I asked questions like, “What does success look like in the next three months?” and “What can I do to get to where I want to go in this time frame?”

I also realized that dialing Pluto back but keeping it going was an option. What would it look like as a side project? If I only had 10-20 hours a week to dedicate to this, how would I spend those hours?

Before deciding what to do next, I highly recommend going down the rabbit hole of considering life without change. 1) Do I continue working full-time on Pluto? or 2) Do I drastically reduce the time I spend on Pluto and work remotely on something else? Before committing to something different, I had to be sure this choice was the right one.

I ended up choosing the latter for a number of reasons. Working remotely allows me to learn what it means to work remote, the best practices. It allows me to connect with others from a distance and to get mentored by people I respect. Importantly, I’ll be able to work from anywhere, set my own schedule and optimize for all the good things that come with that. Now it was time to decide exactly what I’d be doing remotely.
```

## List #2: Aligning my time with my values

No matter what I sink my teeth in, I need to make sure that it aligns with my personal values. One of the best resources I’ve found that gets to the essence of what drives me is from [a similar post by Julian Shapiro](a similar post by Julian Shapiro). This is what he had to say about values:

```
My goal was to identify the values — even those of low significance — I use to assess the worthiness of a project. For each, I asked, does the project allow me to attain:

Knowledge — Do you become more knowledgeable and skilled while doing it?

Adventure — Do you accrue novel and memorable experiences?

Fame — Do you build an audience you can later leverage?

Power — Do you acquire resources and connections?

Money — Do you increase your net worth?

Exercising talent — Do you leverage your skill and creativity?

Human connection — Do you bond (in some form) with others?
```

I took this list, added Artistic Expression, Freedom, and Social Good, then created something like a hierarchy of values. When pursuing relationships of any kind, negotiating, and generally interacting with people, it can be useful to dig for others’ personal hierarchy. Try to find out how they weigh their options. Here’s what my hierarchy looks like, with tier 1 being of the highest importance to me:

![hierarchy of values](https://imagebin.ca/v/4Pzr3jMJAanJ)

Commit message:

/writing full of content that links to blog posts

src/posts/deciding-what-to-do-next.md, after:

---
path: "/deciding-what-to-do-next"
date: "2018-05-15"
title: "Deciding what to do next"
description: "With the limited amount of time we have, it’s extremely important that we spend as much of it as possible doing things that matter most to us. When deciding what to do next, for me, it’s about finding the intersection of three things."
---

With the limited amount of time we have, it’s extremely important that we spend as much of it as possible doing things that matter most to us. Call it your purpose, your why, your reason for being, call it what you want. When deciding what to do next, for me, it’s about finding the intersection of three things: What can I be the best at? What can I make money doing? What am I deeply passionate about?

Time spent not chasing that intersection is time wasted.

I’m looking for things that fall into the category of “I absolutely must do this.” There is a chasm between what we **can do** and what we **absolutely must do**.

I could get a job working at a local company. I could write a book. I could do freelance work. There’s nothing wrong with doing any of these things. The point is, I want to do the things that make me say, “I can’t imagine doing anything else.”

To provide some context, I recently came to a crossroads. For the last year and a half, I’ve been working on [Pluto](https://talkpluto.com/). I’ve been lucky to be chasing that intersection and doing what I absolutely had to do, but, some things change. I learned a ton but ultimately, I decided to change course. This post details my thought process for deciding what to do next with my life after starting a startup. It can be applied to any big decision about what to pursue.

## List #1: Brain dumping everything I want to accomplish

When I created my first list, I wrote down everything I wanted to do. I did this with little forethought, dumping whatever thoughts I had on to the page. I decided to do this same exercise a few different times, in a few different ways. Decisions with long-term effects require long-term thinking. I wasn’t going to be happy if I settled on something I wasn’t excited about.

```
As a side note, I realized that before deciding what to do next, it was perfectly fine to continue doing what I was doing. I asked questions like, “What does success look like in the next three months?” and “What can I do to get to where I want to go in this time frame?”

I also realized that dialing Pluto back but keeping it going was an option. What would it look like as a side project? If I only had 10-20 hours a week to dedicate to this, how would I spend those hours?

Before deciding what to do next, I highly recommend going down the rabbit hole of considering life without change. 1) Do I continue working full-time on Pluto? or 2) Do I drastically reduce the time I spend on Pluto and work remotely on something else? Before committing to something different, I had to be sure this choice was the right one.

I ended up choosing the latter for a number of reasons. Working remotely allows me to learn what it means to work remote, the best practices. It allows me to connect with others from a distance and to get mentored by people I respect. Importantly, I’ll be able to work from anywhere, set my own schedule and optimize for all the good things that come with that. Now it was time to decide exactly what I’d be doing remotely.
```

## List #2: Aligning my time with my values

No matter what I sink my teeth in, I need to make sure that it aligns with my personal values. One of the best resources I’ve found that gets to the essence of what drives me is from [a similar post by Julian Shapiro](a similar post by Julian Shapiro). This is what he had to say about values:

```
My goal was to identify the values — even those of low significance — I use to assess the worthiness of a project. For each, I asked, does the project allow me to attain:

Knowledge — Do you become more knowledgeable and skilled while doing it?

Adventure — Do you accrue novel and memorable experiences?

Fame — Do you build an audience you can later leverage?

Power — Do you acquire resources and connections?

Money — Do you increase your net worth?

Exercising talent — Do you leverage your skill and creativity?

Human connection — Do you bond (in some form) with others?
```

I took this list, added Artistic Expression, Freedom, and Social Good, then created something like a hierarchy of values. When pursuing relationships of any kind, negotiating, and generally interacting with people, it can be useful to dig for others’ personal hierarchy. Try to find out how they weigh their options. Here’s what my hierarchy looks like, with tier 1 being of the highest importance to me:

![hierarchy of values](https://ibin.co/4Pzr3jMJAanJ.png)

After identifying my values, I came up with another list. I allowed myself to be more esoteric this time around, rather than solely focusing on tangible outcomes. I linked this list to the pyramid above. I came up with things like optimizing for learning and growth, falling in love with the journey, gathering skill sets and contacts, and so on.

I thought a lot about what would make me feel happy and fulfilled – what would make me feel whole? It’s fine to think in such lofty terms, but it’s important to ground them and come up with a way to achieve “happiness.” Around this time, I came across an interesting explanation by Tim Ferriss. He said:

> “The opposite of happiness isn’t necessarily sadness, it’s boredom. The opposite of boredom is excitement. Chase what excites you.”

## List #3: How do I want to spend my time in the future?

* That inspired me to refine the list further. I boiled things down and developed a better understanding of how I was going to spend my time. I asked tough questions:
* What does my perfect day look like 3 months from now? 6 months? 1 year? 3 years? For example, in 1 year, I want to be making enough money to live somewhere with mountains and warm weather, I want the freedom to create my own schedule, and I want to engage in creative pursuits.
What can I do today and every day to get closer to that reality?

A big part of deciding what to do next meant figuring out a way to give myself more slack. I wanted to slow down, seek adventure, gather stories. That manifests in different ways including this blog. I now have the time to do deep dives in areas where I’m passionate, curious and interested.

## Final brainstorm: Spotting patterns

After one more intense brainstorming session, I started looking for the activities that repeated. Not surprisingly, I quickly spotted patterns. I could do a little bit of this and a little bit of that but I was seeking a chance to develop focus and discipline. For me, that included deciding to spend most of my time learning to code. I recently started at [Lambda School](https://lambdaschool.com/), “a revolutionary new school that invests in you” (more on Lambda soon.)

I also realized some things are non-negotiable. No matter how I spend the majority of my time, I can check other boxes. The key here is deciding what to do next with flexibility in mind. Some of my non-negotiables include creating more and shipping often, making music, socializing, and moving a business forward. I’ll be slowing down and giving myself the time and space to do nothing and just be.

The thing is, I’m sometimes guilty of spending more time doing the work and getting better at that than choosing what to work on. This time, I didn’t jump into this decision. My list went from 9 things I could do, to 4 things I wanted to achieve, to 25 items, to 5 categories, to 10 activities I absolutely had to make the time for.

We all have a max bandwidth, so where we apply ourselves needs to be well thought out and planned. I took time now to make sure I wasn’t wasting time in the future. I checked all the boxes I could and I’ve got more slack than I’ve had in years. I’m inspired because I’m as sure as I can be that I’m doing what I’m meant to do.
